Alternative Privacy Consideration section (#27)
martinthomson/train-protocol: draft-thomson-train-protocol.md

network elements cannot assume that the signaled limit will be respected by
endpoints.

> # Privacy considerations {#privacy}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Privacy Considerations {#privacy}
```

> In our privacy analysis, we studied whether TRAIN could be used by attackers
> to gain information about the ongoing traffic and compromise the privacy
> of clients or servers by exposing their identity of their activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The focus of this analysis is the extent to which observing TRAIN
packets could be used to gain information about endpoints.
This might be leaking details of how applications using QUIC
operate or leaks of endpoint identity when using additional
privacy protection, such as a VPN.
```

Any network element that can observe the content of that packet can read the
rate limit that was applied.  Any signal is visible on the path, from the point
at which it is applied to the point at which it is consumed at an endpoint.
On path elements can also alter the TRAIN signal to try trigger specific
reactions and gain further knowledge.

In the general case of a client connected to a server through the
Internet, we believe that TRAIN does not provide much advantage to attackers.
The identities of the clients and servers are already visible through their
IP addresses. Traffic analysis tools already provide more information than

> the data rate limits set by TRAIN. However, we are concerned with two avenues
> of attacks: that the passive observation
> of TRAIN might help identify the end points; and that the active manipulation
> of TRAIN signals might help find out the identity of clients or servers
> located behind VPNs or proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data rate limits set by TRAIN.

There are two avenues of attack that require more analysis:

* that the passive observation of TRAIN packets might help identify or
  distinguish endpoints; and
* that active manipulation of TRAIN signals might help reveal the
  identity of endpoints that are otherwise hidden behind VPNs or proxies.
```

> ## Passive observation of TRAIN for fingerprinting endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Passive Attacks
```

If only few clients and server pairs negotiate the usage of TRAIN, the
occasional observation of TRAIN packets will "stick out". That observation,
could be combined with observation of timing and volume of traffic to
help identify the endpoint or categorize the application that they
are using.

A variation of this issue occurs if TRAIN is widely implemented, but
only used in some specific circumstances. In that case, observation of
TRAIN packets reveals information about the state of the endpoint.

If multiple servers are accessed through the same front facing server,
Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) may be used to prevent outside parties to
identify which specific server a client is using. However, if only

> a few of these servers use TRAIN, the observation of TRAIN packets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a few of these servers use TRAIN, any TRAIN packets
```

will help identify which specific server a client is using.

This issue will be mitigated if TRAIN becomes widely implemented, and
if the usage of TRAIN is not limited to the type of applications
that make active use of the signal.

QUIC implementations are therefore encouraged to make the feature available
unconditionally.  Endpoints might send TRAIN packets whenever a peer can accept
them.

> ## Active manipulation of TRAIN to identify endpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Active manipulation of TRAIN to identify endpoints
```

> ## Active manipulation of TRAIN to identify endpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Active Attacks
```

Author: Github does not let me accept the suggestion. I will do it in a separate commit.

> Suppose a configuration in which multiple clients use a VPN or Proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose a configuration in which multiple clients use a VPN or proxy
```

service to access the same server. The attacker sees the IP addresses
in the packets behind VPN and proxy and also between the users and the VPN,
but it does not know which VPN address corresponds to what user address.

> Suppose now that the attacker selects one of the IP addresses observed
> between VPN and server, and inserts TRAIN signals in that flow. The attacker
> can rewrite the TRAIN headers for specific to limit bandwidth
> to a lower than the "natural" bandwidth of the connection. If the
> attacker sees a subsequent drop of traffic between one of the user and
> the VPN, it can associate that user with the VPN address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose now that the attacker selects a flow on the link between the
VPN/proxy and server. The attacker applies rate limit signals to TRAIN packets
in that flow. The attacker chooses a bandwidth that is
lower than the "natural" bandwidth of the connection. A reduction
in the rate of flows between client and VPN/proxy might allow
the attacker to link the altered flow to the client.

~~~ aasvg
+--------+
| Client |------.
+--------+       \      +-------+
                  '---->|       |            +--------+
+--------+              |  VPN  |<==========>|        |
| Client |------------->|   /   |<==========>| Server |
+--------+              | Proxy |<==========>|        |
                  .---->|       |     ^      +--------+
+--------+       /      +-------+     |
| Client |======'                     |
+--------+      ^           Apply rate limit signal
                 \
                  \
               Observe change
~~~
```

> Opinions about the importance of this attack differ. And attacker that
> can manipulate TRAIN headers can also simulate congestion signals by
> dropping packets or by setting the ECN CE bit, and that too will
> cause a subsequent drop of traffic between one of the user and
> the VPN.

Reviewer: I don't think we should say anything about opinions.

```suggestion
An attacker that can manipulate TRAIN headers can also simulate
congestion signals by dropping packets or by setting the ECN CE bit.
That will also likely result in changes in the congestion response by
the affected client.
```

> Mitigating this attack probably requires VPNs to be conscious of TRAIN,
> and use defenses if appropriate. For example, a VPN could decide to blanch
> the TRAIN signals, and a user could decide to not heed TRAIN signals
> if using a VPN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A VPN or proxy could defend against this style of attack by removing TRAIN (and
ECN) signals. There are few reasons to provide per-flow rate limit signals in
that situation.  Endpoints might also either disable this feature or ignore any
signals when they are aware of the use of a VPN or proxy.
```
